

===== PAGE 1/3 =====
 
 
Labour Reforms: 
Formalising and 
Safeguarding India’s Gig & 
Platform Workforce 
December 9th, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Landmark Reform for India’s Gig Economy 
India’s rapidly expanding Gig and Platform workforce  has emerged as a crucial driver of the 
new economic ecosystem, powered by young demographics, digital adoption, and rapid 
urbanization. Recognizing their role, the Code on Social Security, 2020 (SS)  (one of the four 
labour codes implemented in a recent labour reform) formally brings Gig and Platform workers 
under a broader protection umbrella. The reform institutionalises long-overdue security for a 
workforce that has long powered India’s digital economy without commensurate protections. 
Empowering Gig and Platform Workers 
By providing legal recognition, portable social security benefits, a dedicated welfare fund, and a 
national registration framework, the enhanced provisions equip gig and platform workers with  
essential safeguards, empower them with portable rights, and transform informal work 
into a secure, recognised, and sustainable livelihood. 
 
 Gig & platform workers are formally recognised under labour law 
 Social security benefits  include life & disability cover, health & maternity benefits, pension, 
accident insurance, and crèche. 
 Aggregators contribute to a Social Security Fund , and facilitation centre to address worker 
grievances to be setup by Government. 
 Each worker gets a unique Aadhaar-linked ID  on e-Shram, making benefits portable across 
platforms. 
Key Takeaways 

===== PAGE 2/3 =====
  
Legal Recognition 
With no recognition under the Payment of Wages Act (1936), Minimum Wages Act (1948), EPF 
Act, or ESI Act, Gig and Platform workers were considered a part of the informal or unorganised 
sector. The SS Code for the first time, provides a formal recognition to  Gig workers and 
Platform workers, bringing them under the ambit of social security and legal protection. 
Moreover, certain definitions have also been included to augment the recognition: 
 “Aggregator” - a digital intermediary or a market place for a buyer or user of a service 
to connect with the seller or the service provider;  
 ‘Gig worker’- a person who performs work or participates in a work arrangement and 
earns from such activities outside of traditional employer-employee relationship;  
 ‘Platform worker’ – a person engaged in or undertaking platform work and;  
 ‘Platform work ’ - work arrangement outside of a traditional employer-employee 
relationship in which organisations or individuals use an online platform to access other 
organisations or individuals to solve specific problems or to provide specific services or 
any such other activities which may be notified by the Central Government, in exchange 
for payment. 
Welfare / Social Security Fund 
Under the SS Code, aggregators are now required to contribute 1-2% of their annual turnover 
(capped at 5% of payments made or payable to gig/platform workers) to a Social Security 
Fund. The fund finances a range of welfare schemes for these workers, where earlier, these 
workers bore all risks themselves, with no obligation on aggregators to contribute to their 
welfare. The Code has provisions for multiple financing mechanism, from the Government, CSR 
initiatives, etc. 
Social Security Schemes 


===== PAGE 3/3 =====
Once dependent solely on 
voluntary schemes or CSR 
initiatives, with no 
statutory entitlement to 
PF, ESI, pension or 
insurance, Gig & Platform 
workers now become 
eligible for government-
notified social security 
benefits such as accident 
insurance, health and 
maternity benefits, any 
other benefits. This 
landmark reform shifts 
these workers from being 
invisible in the legal framework to becoming part of a formal social security framework.   
Portability of Benefits 
Gig and platform workers can continue to enjoy their social security benefits even when 
switching jobs or platforms , ensuring continuity and security. These benefits were lost 
previously, while switching jobs. However, now each worker will receive a unique Aadhaar-
linked ID generated through registration on e-Shram , allowing their social security benefits 
to be portable across platforms . Whether juggling multiple platforms or moving from one 
Platform to another, workers retain a unified set of benefits that continues seamlessly. 
Registration & Database 
Gig and platform workers can self-register on the Government e-Shram portal , creating a 
comprehensive national database  that supports social security, skill development, targeted 
delivery of welfare delivery and policy making. 
Grievance Redressal 
Earlier, Gig and Platform workers had no access to formal labour laws and therefore, no 
structured grievance redressal mechanism. Under the SS Code , the appropriate Government 
may set-up a toll-free helpline, call centre, or facilitation centre to address worker grievances 
and ensure timely support. 
Transforming the Gig Economy: From Informal to Protected 
Gig and platform workers, once largely invisible, highly vulnerable and without uniform 
benefits, now gain a baseline of protections and social security coverage . This reform marks 
a major step towards formalising the Gig economy, granting these workers legal recognition, 
tangible support, and access to welfare schemes that were long missing. By establishing a 
dedicated Social Security Fund, portable benefits, and a national registration framework 
through e-Shram, the Code on Social Security, 2020, not only safeguards today’s workforce but 
also lays the foundation for a more inclusive, resilient, and future-ready gig economy. 
 
M  
